[Music]
I've had to install some acoustic
damping on the walls in my studio
because bare walls reflect a lot of
sound when that sound bounces around in
a room you end up with some unpleasant
reverb but you'll know if you've got
noisy neighbors that walls don't reflect
sound completely some sound is
transmitted in other words you can hear
a little bit what the neighbors are up
to and how much sound is transmitted and
how much sound is reflected is governed
by how different those two mediums are
so you've got the medium of air and the
medium of say brick in the case of a
wall and the more different they are the
more sound is reflected the more similar
they are the more sound is transmitted
and when talking about these two mediums
being similar or different and talk
about a specific property which is
acoustic impedance acoustic impedance is
sort of like how much does the substance
resist acoustic energy and brick has a
really high acoustic impedance compared
to air
so almost all sound is reflected at a
brick wall in other words you can only
really hear what your neighbors are
saying when they're properly screaming
that all makes sense but if you know
anything about the anatomy of an ear you
might now be wondering how is it that
humans can hear anything at all above
just muffles because the cochlea the
little organ that has those tiny hairs
inside that vibrate backwards and
forwards with acoustic waves that pass
over them those little hairs are in
liquid essentially water from an
acoustic point of view so you've got
this sound that reaches us through the
air but it ends up in liquid it ends up
in water and water has an acoustic
impedance which is about three thousand
times that of air if you plug that into
the right equations you find that only
about naught point one percent of
acoustic energy will get across that
interface between air and
water to reach those little hairs in
your cochlear it's a bit like trying to
hear what's happening outside the pool
when you dunk your so how is it possible
that our sense of hearing is so good how
can we hear all the things that were
able to hear your ears are able to
transfer most of the acoustic energy
from air to the water inside your
cochlear through a process called
impedance matching if you've studied
circuits at all you may have come across
impedance matching but it applies to
acoustic energy as well your ear
achieves this in two really clever ways
and they both involve mechanical
advantage the first I'll talk about is
the lever inside your ear so there are
these three bones in your middle ear
that you might be familiar with and
amazingly they act as a lever to
illustrate how a lever can overcome the
difference in impedance between two
mediums
I've resurrected my wave machine I made
a video a while back about ultrasound
gel which is also used to mitigate
reflections that you get when there's a
mismatch in impedance between two
mediums in that video I demonstrate how
a wave is partially reflected and
partially transmitted at a boundary
between two mediums of different
impedance see the impedance on the left
is higher because I've added weights to
those rods in the form of nuts perhaps
you can see intuitively why this happens
at the boundary between the two the
light rod is trying to pull up the
heavier rod for because the heavier rod
has more inertia it can't pull it up as
far and the rest of the energy is
reflected if it doesn't make intuitive
sense or if you want a full explanation
I recommend you watch the original
ultrasound gel video but for our
purposes here it's enough to know that
the light rod can't move the heavy rod
as much because of the extra inertia so
only some of the energy is transmitted
and the rest is reflected how can that
be fixed with a lever well let's split
the wave machine in two and put a lever
in the middle there at the moment
there's no difference in impedance on
either side it's the same weights all
the way along and the lever is pivoted
in the middle so we should expect all
the wave energy to be
transmitted through the lever we don't
quite see that some of the energy is
reflected and that's because the lever
isn't perfect it has some mass of its
own and there's friction there but in an
ideal world all the energy would be
transmitted and all what happen is that
the the way would be flipped upside down
by the lever let's add some weights to
the left-hand side of the wave machine
now the lever is like an intermediary
between two mediums of different
impedance and with the lever pivoted in
the center still we should expect
roughly the same amount of transmission
and reflection as if the lever wasn't
there and that's roughly what we see so
how can we make an adjustment to the
lever to alleviate the problem well
remember the issue is that you've got a
light rod trying to move a heavy rod and
this is the kind of scenario that levers
were designed to deal with like look
you've got a heavy object and a light
object on either side of this lever and
the heavy object is winning but if you
want to balance things out then you just
move the pivot point or fulcrum of the
lever as it's properly called in this
way you're giving the lighter object
mechanical advantage you're now able to
move that heavier object with the
lighter object or in other words with a
smaller force than you would have needed
otherwise by the way you're not gaining
any energy magically in this scenario
although you're able to move a heavy
object with a smaller force that smaller
force has to travel over a greater
distance so the work done is the same as
it was before so let's try that out now
with our wave machine by moving the
fulcrum of the lever towards the medium
of higher impedance we're giving the
medium of lower impedance a mechanical
advantage and look more of the energy is
transmitted remember is not just about
the amplitude that's that it's heavier
so even a small amplitude carries a lot
of energy the point is there isn't as
much reflection we're still going to get
a little bit because as always the lever
is imperfect but we've done a good job
here of transmitting much more of the
energy and that's exactly what's
happening inside your ear the pivot
point is about
here roughly it's hard to see the nature
of the lever inside your ear because the
bones are all funny shapes but it really
is there that lever isn't the whole
story those three bones in your ear
together don't account for enough
mechanical advantage to entirely fix the
impedance mismatch we need one more
source of mechanical advantage to see
where that is look at the difference in
size between the eardrum and the oval
window you'll notice that the eardrum is
larger than the oval window it's able to
gather a large amount of acoustic energy
over its large surface area and focus
that acoustic energy onto the smaller
area of the oval window strictly
speaking I shouldn't be calling that
mechanical advantage actually because
technically that's when you've got a
small input force leading to a large
output force but what we're doing here
is just gathering more force by having a
large surface area but anyway those are
the two mechanisms the difference in
surface area and that crazy little lever
on the inside of your ear I'm in
quarantine now by the way so you may
occasionally hear my family in the
background one last bonus interesting
thing there's a muscle in your middle
ear called the tensor tympani muscle
it's connected to the malleus that's the
bone that's connected to your eardrum
and you can experience the effect of
those tensor tympani muscles tensing up
if you scrunch up your face like really
scrunch it up like that you may hear a
rumble in your ears or if you yawn you
may hear a rumble in your ears and that
Rumble is basically that muscle you know
going like that you know there's little
vibrations from the muscle tensing up
passing through into you're in it yeah
but it's actually a protective mechanism
so it pulls on the malleus bone which
pulls on the eardrum so the eardrum is
pulled taut and when it's tight like
that it's less sensitive to sound waves
coming in it's a reflex
so if there's a sudden loud sound or a
continuous loud sound your tensor
tympani muscle will pull your eardrum
taut so that less of the sound is
transmitted
- you're in it year it even responds
when there's a perceived threat of a
potential loud sound and actually if
your ears rumble in unusual situations
where you wouldn't expect there to be a
loud sound but perhaps you're stressed
or anxious you may suffer from tonic
tensor tympani syndrome that's when your
tensor tympani muscle tenses up when it
shouldn't this video is made possible by
my patrons on patreon and Nord VPN do
you need a VPN let's try and figure that
out so a VPN takes all the traffic all
the internet traffic coming from your
device with it encrypts it and it sends
it to an endpoint somewhere in the world
it decrypts it and sends it on to
whatever services you are trying to
connect to you know emails websites that
sort of thing
that serves two functions the first is
your internet service provider or
whoever's Wi-Fi you're connected to they
can't see your traffic because it's
encrypted the second thing is whatever
services you're trying to reach like
YouTube for example they don't know
where you are they only know the
location of the endpoint somewhere in
the world and with no VPN you can choose
where that endpoint is in the world you
can use that to get around geo-fenced
services like this video isn't available
in your country and all that sort of
thing do you need to worry about your
internet service provider or Wi-Fi
provider seeing the data that you send
over the Internet well if you only ever
visit websites that have SSL enabled
then maybe you don't but maybe you are
visiting websites that don't have SSL
yet and maybe you're not always checking
every website you visit for example I
maintain some WordPress blogs and they
don't have SSL I can't control that side
of it so when I log in through some
random Wi-Fi I have to use a VPN
otherwise I'm sending my password over
plaintext even if you make sure that
every way you visit is HTTPS the domain
name is still sent in clear text you've
got to decide whether these things are
important to you or not
if they are I strongly recommend you
think about installing a VPN like Nord
VPN if you go to North Vee PN comm
forward slash Steve you'll get 70% off
for three years plus an additional 30
days absolutely free
at least you may even get a bit more
than that if you're lucky so check it
out today
I hope you enjoyed this video if you did
don't forget to subscribe and I'll see
you next time
[Music]